Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews. And Daryl Lane. How and when did science fiction begin?
Well, that's a question with numerous answers. And one major problem in
answering it is that science fiction has not always been a separate category of
fiction. Its disengagement from so-called mainstream literature is fairly
recent. Writer L. Sprague de Camp has some thoughts on the subject. You have to
remember that at one time, imaginative fiction, that is science fiction and
fantasy, was the mainstream. Prior to, I think it was about the year 1719, when
Defoe published Robinson Crusoe, there was, practically speaking, no such thing
as realistic fiction. There were one or two scattered exceptions, but, like the
first one was Don Quixote. But, by and large, practically all fiction had
elements that we should recognize today as science fiction or fantasy. That is
to say, ghosts and miracles and marvelous gadgets of one kind or another. Why,
the Odyssey is a science fiction and fantasy saga right there, with the witch of
Circe turning people into pigs, and the monsters, Scylla and Charybdis, eating
ships, and so on. The transformation of imaginative literature into what we
recognize today as science fiction occurred in the early part of this century,
mostly in the pulp magazines, such as Hugo Gernsback's Amazing Stories. Jack
Williamson, who wrote for Gernsback, recalls that there was no term science
fiction when Amazing Stories began in the 20s. When I started, my first story
was printed as science fiction. Hugo Gernsback ran the words science and fiction
together. He invented the term science fiction in 1929, I think. And at that
time, you had to explain what it was. I used to say it was adventure stories
with a science background. This science background was of importance to
Gernsback, yet he still wanted stories with excitement and adventure. He
preached a gospel that science fiction was sugar-coated science, that it was
education. And he got a whole panel of experts with degrees that were supposed
to vet the science and science wonder stories when he started that. But
actually, I think that was as much for, well, to impress the readers as anything
else, because he did use true science in his stories when he could get it, but
he also printed a lot of stories that were pretty wild. I think always in the
magazine, the adventure element was more important than the science. At first,
professional writers didn't contribute much scientific fiction to the pulps. The
field was new, its readership was uncertain, and the rates were low. In the
beginning, they were amazingly filled up with reprints of classic science
fiction, and the rates were so low that professional writers didn't write for
them, so that when they wrote new stories, they were mostly written by immatures
such as myself. The classic science fiction Williamson mentions was work by
authors who were immensely popular around the turn of the century and a bit
earlier, such as Jules Verne, Edgar Rice Burroughs, and H.G. Wells. But the new
writers did come. In a field that has yet had no definition or shape, these new
authors created the styles and themes that are the foundation of today's science
fiction. And most of them, as Williamson recalls, started out in John Campbell's
Astounding Stories. They all started in Campbell's magazine, Astounding. He was,
well, I don't know whether you'd say Campbell discovered them or they discovered
him, but it was a small group with a great deal of, well, fellowship or fellow
understanding and so forth. It was an exciting period in which to be alive.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
cCming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. I'm Daryl Lane. What we today call science fiction took
shape in the pages of the colorful pulp magazines of the 1920s and 30s. Jack
Williamson, who wrote for those pulp magazines, is a living history of science
fiction. His career as a writer goes back to the 1920s, before the term science
fiction was even created. He grew up in the early part of the century on the
frontier plains of New Mexico. Not long after he discovered the fresh and
exciting new world of science fiction, he began selling his work to Hugo
Gernsback's Amazing Stories, which was the first science fiction publication. I
grew up on a sandhill farm in the south part of this county when times were
pretty grim.
I, well, wanted to be some sort of scientist without any direction or means to
get a scientific education. And a few months after Gernsback started the old
Amazing, I came across some copies of it. And I was immediately fascinated with
experiments that worked, with travel in time and spaceships to other worlds, and
all sorts of wonderful things. And it's been an important share of my life ever
since. The pay scale for early science fiction writers was minimal. There were
no movie rights or paperback contracts. Yet Williamson was able to produce
enough fiction to make a living at it. Gernsback paid a half a cent a word or
less, which meant, well, you'd get $25 for a short story and $75 for a
novelette. But Clayton paid two cents a word and up, which is one reason maybe
the Clayton magazines went bankrupt in the Great Depression. But that meant that
I could pound out 4,000 words a day for two days and earn $160, which was a
fabulous feat for a farm kid in Depression days.
Amazing Stories was a pulp magazine. A pulp was printed on cheap paper. They
were usually large format magazines with lurid and colorful illustrations on the
cover to catch the attention of prospective readers. In those days, before the
paperbacks and before TV and before the comics, when people read a lot more for
entertainment than they do nowadays, there were really three sorts of magazines.
There were the quality magazines like Harper's and the old Scribner's Atlantic
for people with brains, and the slicks printed on coated paper that would take
good advertising for people with money to spend, and the pulp for people who had
neither brains nor money. But we had a lot of fun in the pulps, even if we were
looked down upon widely. And eventually, why? Science fiction got recognized as
being not entirely without brains, let's say. And nowadays, there's a little bit
of money in it sometimes. A good deal of this early science fiction published in
the pulps was space opera, a term which denotes a melodramatic form of science
fiction characterized by heroes and villains, maidens in distress, and
intergalactic warfare. Right. Buck Rogers-type stuff. It's unsophisticated, but
Williamson admires it. And, he points out, it's still around in the movies. I've
never objected to space opera. I still think it's wonderful. And I even think
that Star Wars could have been made out of my Legion stories as well as it was
from something else. I enjoyed Star Wars tremendously as a sort of adolescent
daydream. And, well, the pulp readers were mostly young and as naive as I was.
And the space opera was a sort of symbolic escape from all sorts of things.
Though it does still turn up now and then, space opera was left behind as
science fiction, along with Jack Williamson, moved ahead into its golden age.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Crews. In the late 1930s, science fiction was in
transition. In one sense, it was becoming more sophisticated, outgrowing its
early emphasis on space opera. Jack Williamson, who wrote space opera, considers
this change natural. I was growing up, and the readers were growing up. That's
something that's been going on in science fiction, at least in American science
fiction all along. I think you can draw a distinction between, let's say,
European or mainstream science fiction on the one hand, which has always been
recognized and treated as literature, and the part of American science fiction,
which was looked down on. But as the readers of that grew older, some of them
started writing, some of them started editing magazines. Most of them outgrew
science fiction, but some of them didn't. So there was a continual increase in
education, the sophistication, and so forth of the whole field. Among these
readers of pulp science fiction were a few who developed into those authors
whose work defined what science fiction would become in later years. These early
readers were people like Isaac Asimov, Robert Heinlein, A.E. van Vogt, Theodore
Sturgeon, L. Sprague de Camp, Frederik Pohl, and Hal Clement. And these authors
are now the classics, those who wrote in that very special period of science
fiction called the Golden Age. A.E. van Vogt, looking back at that period, says
that he read the authors who were starting out then with him, but that he had no
idea they were doing anything special. Well, I read their stories. You know what
I mean? I was always fascinated by these various stories. I read every issue
that came out. So when you say, what was it like? It just seemed like a
perfectly natural thing that was happening. The notion that we were operating in
a special period of time did not occur to me. You know, I mean, we were just
doing our thing. And everybody was evidently stimulated in a special way.
Frederick Pohl belonged to a group of writers and fans in New York called the
Futurians. He remembers the closeness of the group and how they would help each
other. Well, science fiction has some special traits, and one of them is that
its readers herd together as much as they can. They form fan clubs and
associations and correspondence groups and so on. And in New York City, there
were quite a few science fiction fans. And about 25 or 30, most of whom wanted
to be writers, formed a club called the Futurians. There were people like Cyril
Kornbluth and Isaac Asimov and Damon Knight and myself and quite a few others.
We did discuss each other's work a lot. And I guess in the process of
criticizing it, there was a lot of help given. I think the biggest factor that
made it easier for a lot of us to go on with writing was just the knowledge that
other people were doing it. And also the fact that we collaborated a lot. We
remedied each other's deficiencies by writing, I mean by collaborating on single
stories. And although most of the stories were not very good, we did learn
something by seeing how other people would tackle the same subjects we were
writing about. L. Sprague de Camp also remembers this closeness among writers at
the beginning of the Golden Age. But like van Vogt, de Camp says that the
authors had no sense of participating in anything special. Well, I dare say that
various ones of us did have their dreams and fancies at times and wondered how
it was all going to come out. And would this become, would the genre expand and
take over the mainstream and various things of that sort? But as to that, mostly
it was, as I said, it was simply a matter of making a living. But the living
those young writers made is the foundation of today's science fiction.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. This is Bill Vernon. And David Carson. No individual has
left his imprint on modern science fiction as deeply as John W. Campbell. And he
didn't do it as a writer, though he did write good science fiction. He did it as
an editor. Jack Williamson, who wrote for Campbell, speaks of the qualities that
made Campbell the most important editor in the history of science fiction. I
think he influenced the way nearly everybody wrote science fiction, because when
he became editor of Amazing, and later changed the, I mean Astounding, and later
changed the name to Analog, he had the best, highest-paying market in the field.
He was, well, let's say science fiction was serious to him as a way of
speculating about science and its impact and the future of mankind and so forth.
He was tremendously inventive. He was full of ideas that he shared very freely,
and everybody who was writing science fiction for those years was influenced by
Campbell, it seems to me, whether directly or not. If they weren't trying to
write for him and reading his letters, they were reading such writers as
Heinlein and de Camp and Sturgeon and a dozen others who were Campbell writers.
From 1938 to 1950, Campbell edited astounding stories. 1939, his second year as
the head of the magazine, was a high point in the history of science fiction. It
was in that year that Campbell published the first science fiction stories of
Robert Heinlein, Theodore Sturgeon, A.E. van Vogt, and Isaac Asimov. Williamson
remembers reading their first works in Astounding. They all started in
Campbell's magazine, Astounding. He was, well, I don't know whether you'd say
Campbell discovered them or they discovered him, but it was a, let's say, a
small group with a great deal of, well, fellowship or fellow understanding and
so forth. It was an exciting period in which to be alive. If you were a science
fiction fan, it was an exciting period in which to be alive, all right. And John
Campbell was the right man at the right time, a leader who guided, pushed, and
cajoled science fiction into the modern world. A.E. van Vogt, one of science
fiction's classic authors, recalls that he might not have ever written science
fiction if not for Campbell's encouragement. I had read science fiction when I
was 14 in the early Amazing.
However, the Amazing Stories was taken over from Hugo Gernsback by a man called
T. O'Conor Sloane, or T. Conor O'Sloane or something like that. And he didn't
know how to edit a magazine. And after he'd been editing it for a few issues, I
lost interest in it. So I never read it again until 1938 when I picked up the
issue of Astounding titled, in which Campbell's own story under a pseudonym was,
Who Goes There? And when I read that story, I sent him a letter outlining an
idea.
And he answered me. So if he hadn't answered, I may not have had a science
fiction career. But I discovered later, he answered all letters like that. In
addition to encouraging authors, Campbell had helped them locate story ideas.
Frederick Pohl, himself an important editor, says this was one of Campbell's
greatest strengths as an editor. Quite a few stories come to be written because
an editor says, listen, you've got a notion here that you are throwing away and
you really should expand it. John Campbell was superb at that sort of thing.
Some of the best stories he published were the result of his telling a writer
that he had an idea they didn't realize he had. John W. Campbell. Science
fiction would be here, even if he hadn't been, but it surely wouldn't be the
same.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And David Carson. Science fiction owes a debt to John W.
Campbell. He brought it into the modern world and had a large hand in initiating
its golden age. During his period as editor of Astounding Stories, from 1938 to
1950, Campbell discovered and encouraged writers who are now classics in the
field of science fiction. Author Jack Williamson says that Campbell's influence
on an author was not heavy-handed or overly critical. He was even supportive of
ideas he didn't agree with if they happened to be good ones. Campbell and I
thought so much alike so that I always felt at home with his magazine and
enjoyed working with him. And he gave me occasional very useful suggestions that
I used. And he never did, well, edit my material heavily or try to persuade me
to say anything I didn't want to say. I believe that personally he was
optimistic about science and the future. But when I wrote such a pessimistic
dystopian thing as The Folded Hands, well, he published it as it was. And I
asked for more. Campbell influenced his authors in different ways. L. Sprague de
Camp, for instance, remembers him as a teacher, but not as a source of original
ideas. I learned a great deal of what I think I know about storytelling from
him. One thing that did not occur between us was his proposing story ideas and
having me write them, because I've never been very good at turning other
people's ideas into effective stories. So he may have tried it a few times, but
when nothing came of it, why, he, I guess he quit. I can't think of one story
that he proposed, and I wrote the story, but then he rejected it. I finally sold
it to one of his competitors. That was The Ghosts of Melvin Pye. He suggested a
ghost story in which the dead man had had a split personality, so he had two
ghosts. One thing that Campbell would insist on in stories he bought was
scientific accuracy, the consistency with actual science and the laws of the
universe. Author Hal Clement talks about Campbell's insistence on credibility.
John was the one who bought my first several stories. I knew him quite well,
talked to him quite often. While I didn't always agree with him, we both felt
that there were rules and that they ought to be followed. We were both
materialists, I guess. We felt that the universe does run by rule, and we felt
that a story was most believable when it matched those rules, at least as we,
meaning humanity in general, currently understood them. Campbell was involved in
publishing Clement's science fiction novel, Mission of Gravity. Frederik Pohl,
who was Clement's agent at that time, tells an interesting story regarding the
circumstances of its publication. Pohl sent the novel to Campbell, who rejected
it. He sent it back. He said, uh, pretty good stuff, but, uh, you should know,
Fred, that there's a difference between a novel that reads well as a book and a
novel that reads well as a serial, and this one just does not break as a serial.
So I knew he was wrong, and I knew I couldn't argue him out of it. And so I
looked at the manuscript, which was, I think, 270 pages long or something like
that, and I counted up to page 90 and drew a line under a paragraph there, and
counted up to page 180 and drew a line under a paragraph there, and had my
secretary retype a couple of pages on each side of each line, saying at the
bottom of the first part, end of part one, at the beginning of the second part,
beginning of part two. And I let it sit for a couple weeks, and I sent it back
to John, and he bought it. Mission of Gravity, of course, went on to become one
of the classic science fiction novels, and Campbell is remembered as the
greatest editor science fiction has ever had. It is not coincidental that his
time at the head of Astounding Stories, 1938 to 1950, is now called the Golden
Age of Science Fiction.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.